>Appréciation, en IFRS 9, du critère SPPI pour un actif financier comportant des clauses contractuelles susceptibles de modifier le montant ou l’échéancier des flux de trésorerie en cas d’événement déclencheur

Pour cette réponse, on considère que
  - On suppose qu’il s’agit d’un actif financier relevant d’IFRS 9.
  - On suppose que les faits fournis ne précisent ni le modèle économique ni la nature exacte du déclencheur ; l’analyse porte donc uniquement sur l’effet de la clause contingente sur le critère SPPI.
  - On suppose que la clause contractuelle modifie potentiellement le montant ou l’échéancier des flux de trésorerie sur la durée de vie de l’instrument.

**Oui**, Oui, un instrument comportant un événement déclencheur peut encore satisfaire SPPI si, dans tous les scénarios contractuels possibles, les flux restent compatibles avec un prêt basique ou ne sont pas significativement différents d’un instrument identique sans cette clause contingente (IFRS 9 B4.1.10, B4.1.10A). Si la clause introduit une exposition à des risques non liés à un prêt basique, SPPI échoue et l’actif relève du FVPL.

Dans cette situation, le coût amorti n’est possible que si la clause déclenchée n’empêche pas les flux d’être uniquement des remboursements de principal et d’intérêts et si l’actif est détenu pour encaisser les flux contractuels (IFRS 9 4.1.2, B4.1.10). Si le déclencheur modifie les flux, il faut apprécier les flux avant et après le changement, sans tenir compte de la probabilité de survenance ; certains déclencheurs non liés aux risques de prêt restent admissibles si les flux ne sont pas significativement différents d’un instrument identique sans cette clause (IFRS 9 B4.1.10A)(IFRS 9 4.1.2, IFRS 9 B4.1.10, IFRS 9 B4.1.10A).
Dans cette situation, le classement en FVOCI n’est ouvert que si la même clause contingente respecte SPPI et si le modèle économique combine encaissement des flux contractuels et ventes (IFRS 9 4.1.2A, B4.1.10). L’existence d’un déclencheur n’exclut donc pas, à elle seule, SPPI ; l’analyse reste centrée sur les flux contractuels possibles sur toute la vie de l’instrument et, le cas échéant, sur l’absence de différence significative avec un instrument sans la clause (IFRS 9 B4.1.10A)(IFRS 9 4.1.2A, IFRS 9 B4.1.10, IFRS 9 B4.1.10A).
Dans cette situation, le FVPL s’applique si la clause déclenchée introduit une exposition incompatible avec un prêt basique, par exemple liée à des prix d’actions, de matières premières ou à un indice non constitutif d’un risque ou coût de prêt (IFRS 9 B4.1.7A, B4.1.14). C’est aussi l’issue lorsque, après examen des flux possibles avant et après le déclenchement, SPPI n’est pas respecté ; la seule présence d’un déclencheur n’est pas décisive, mais son effet économique sur les flux l’est (IFRS 9 B4.1.10)(IFRS 9 B4.1.7A, IFRS 9 B4.1.10, IFRS 9 B4.1.14).

**Citations**:
 - [IFRS 9 4.1.2](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_412)

    >A financial asset shall be measured at amortised cost if both of the following conditions are met: **(a)the financial asset is held within a business model whose objective is to hold financial assets in order to collect contractual cash flows and (b)the contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.** Paragraphs B4.1.1⁠–⁠B4.1.26 provide guidance on how to apply these conditions.

 - [IFRS 9 B4.1.10](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_B4110)

    >If a financial asset contains a contractual term that could change the timing or amount of contractual cash flows (for example, if the asset can be prepaid before maturity or its term can be extended), **the entity must determine whether the contractual cash flows that could arise over the life of the instrument due to that contractual term are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. To make this determination, the entity must assess the contractual cash flows that could arise both before, and after, the change in contractual cash flows, irrespective of the probability of the change in contractual cash flows occurring.** The entity may also need to assess the nature of any contingent event (ie the trigger) that would change the timing or amount of the contractual cash flows. While the nature of the contingent event in itself is not a determinative factor in assessing whether the contractual cash flows are solely payments of principal and interest, it may be an indicator. For example, compare a financial instrument with an interest rate that is reset to a higher rate if the debtor misses a particular number of payments to a financial instrument with an interest rate that is reset to a higher rate if a specified equity index reaches a particular level. It is more likely in the former case that the contractual cash flows over the life of the instrument will be solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding because of the relationship between missed payments and an increase in credit risk. In the former case, the nature of the contingent event relates directly to, and the contractual cash flows change in the same direction as, changes in basic lending risks and costs. (See also paragraph B4.1.18.)

 - [IFRS 9 B4.1.10A](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_B4110A)

    >In some cases, a contingent feature gives rise to contractual cash flows that are consistent with a basic lending arrangement both before and after the change in contractual cash flows, but the nature of the contingent event itself does not relate directly to changes in basic lending risks and costs. For example, the interest rate on a loan is adjusted by a specified amount if the debtor achieves a contractually specified reduction in carbon emissions. In such a case, when applying paragraph B4.1.10, **the financial asset has contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding if, and only if, in all contractually possible scenarios, the contractual cash flows would not be significantly different from the contractual cash flows on a financial instrument with identical contractual terms, but without such a contingent feature.** In some circumstances, the entity may be able to make that determination by performing a qualitative assessment; but, in other circumstances, it may be necessary to perform a quantitative assessment. If it is clear, with little or no analysis, that the contractual cash flows are not significantly different, an entity need not perform a detailed assessment.

 - [IFRS 9 4.1.2A](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_412A)

    >A financial asset shall be measured at fair value through other comprehensive income if both of the following conditions are met: **(a)the financial asset is held within a business model whose objective is achieved by both collecting contractual cash flows and selling financial assets and (b)the contractual terms of the financial asset give rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.** Paragraphs B4.1.1⁠–⁠B4.1.26 provide guidance on how to apply these conditions.

 - [IFRS 9 B4.1.7A](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_B417A)

    >Contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding are consistent with a basic lending arrangement. In a basic lending arrangement, consideration for the time value of money (see paragraphs B4.1.9A⁠–⁠B4.1.9E) and credit risk are typically the most significant elements of interest. However, in such an arrangement, interest can also include consideration for other basic lending risks (for example, liquidity risk) and costs (for example, administrative costs) associated with holding the financial asset for a particular period of time. In addition, interest can include a profit margin that is consistent with a basic lending arrangement. In extreme economic circumstances, interest can be negative if, for example, the holder of a financial asset either explicitly or implicitly pays for the deposit of its money for a particular period of time (and that fee exceeds the consideration that the holder receives for the time value of money, credit risk and other basic lending risks and costs). **However, contractual terms that introduce exposure to risks or volatility in the contractual cash flows that is unrelated to a basic lending arrangement, such as exposure to changes in equity prices or commodity prices, do not give rise to contractual cash flows that are solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.** An originated or a purchased financial asset can be a basic lending arrangement irrespective of whether it is a loan in its legal form.

 - [IFRS 9 B4.1.14](https://www.ifrs.org/issued-standards/list-of-standards/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/content/dam/ifrs/publications/html-standards/english/2026/issued/ifrs-9-financial-instruments/#/IFRS9_B4114)

    >The following examples illustrate contractual cash flows that are not solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. This list of examples is not exhaustive.
InstrumentFInstrumentFisabondthatisconvertibleintoafixednumberofequityinstrumentsoftheissuer.The holder would analyse the convertible bond in its entirety.
**The contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding because they reflect a return that is inconsistent with a basic lending arrangement** (see paragraph B4.1.7A); ie the return is linked to the value of the equity of the issuer.
InstrumentGInstrumentGisaloanthatpaysaninversefloatinginterestrate(ietheinterestratehasaninverserelationshiptomarketinterestrates).**The contractual cash flows are not solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.**
The interest amounts are not consideration for the time value of money on the principal amount outstanding.
InstrumentHInstrumentHisaperpetualinstrumentbuttheissuermaycalltheinstrumentatanypointandpaytheholdertheparamountplusaccruedinterestdue.InstrumentHpaysamarketinterestratebutpaymentofinterestcannotbemadeunlesstheissuerisabletoremainsolventimmediatelyafterwards.Deferredinterestdoesnotaccrueadditionalinterest.**The contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.** That is because the issuer may be required to defer interest payments and additional interest does not accrue on those deferred interest amounts. As a result, interest amounts are not consideration for the time value of money on the principal amount outstanding.
If interest accrued on the deferred amounts, the contractual cash flows could be payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.
The fact that Instrument H is perpetual does not in itself mean that the contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. In effect, a perpetual instrument has continuous (multiple) extension options. Such options may result in contractual cash flows that are payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding if interest payments are mandatory and must be paid in perpetuity.
Also, the fact that Instrument H is callable does not mean that the contractual cash flows are not payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding unless it is callable at an amount that does not substantially reflect payment of outstanding principal and interest on that principal amount outstanding. Even if the callable amount includes an amount that reasonably compensates the holder for the early termination of the instrument, the contractual cash flows could be payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding. (See also paragraph B4.1.12.)
InstrumentIInstrumentIisaloanwithaninterestratethatisadjustedeveryreportingperiodtotrackthemovementsinamarket-determinedcarbonpriceindexduringtheprecedingreportingperiod.**The contractual cash flows are not solely payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding.**
**The contractual cash flows are indexed to a variable (the carbon price index), which is not a basic lending risk or cost. The contractual cash flows are therefore inconsistent with a basic lending arrangement** (see paragraph B4.1.8A).
